

When I started my job, I was issued a Windows laptop. While it is a great machine and one of the best Windows laptops I've come across (Dell Latitude 7420), it still runs Windows. When developing and working with software, I find it's easier to use a Linux OS. I want / need to keep access to Windows for the Office suite and to follow the guidance of the IT department. 

My solution was to set up a Ubuntu VM in Hyper-V Manager (included in Windows 11 Enterprise), and use this machine for anything that involves working with code. Code works as if it was being run on any machine (which is not the case with WSL!). 

This post will outline the gotchas, configuration and maintenance I've had to endure to make this a good solution for me. This is intended for those with less experience configuring and managing (virtual) machines.

We won't cover provisioning a Linux VM here, but there are lots of useful resources online.

# Remote Desktop

By default, Hyper-V Manager will launch an "Enhanced Session" when you connect to a provisioned VM (using `xrdp`). After entering your login details, you may be greeted with a blank screen. If this is the case, you may need to disable the "Enhanced Session" setting from the View menu in the bar at the top. This means you will lose some features (such as clipboard sharing), but will mean you can get into your VM.

Frustratingly, I can't remember what I did to fix Enhanced Session, but it now works. I have a feeling it was something like [this](https://askubuntu.com/a/1479646), but don't know for sure. 

Either way: if you can't login, disable Enhanced Session to gain access, and then try to fix your issue from there.

# VS Code

After downloading VS Code, you can now write, edit and run code in a Linux environment! 

However, after a few days, the input lag was too irritating to carry on using. I remembered using PyCharm Remote Backend at University to connect from my laptop to a machine with a GPU to train ML models, so looked to see it it's possible with VSCode (I'm working with Terraform and bash mostly, so PyCharm isn't needed).

VSCode offers [Remote Development](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/ssh), and it works really well! The linked page includes instructions on how to install and set it up.

## Using an SSH certificate

I was using a password at first, but you are required to enter this every time VS Code will connect to the VM. This can be stopped by instead using a SSH certificate. 

You can find instructions on how to do this [here](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-set-up-ssh-keys-on-ubuntu-22-04).

# Storage

I found my Virtual Hard Drive filled up quickly, so I used Hyper V to expand it. I did this wrong, and the disk ended up non-bootable! I had to use a CD install file to boot Ubuntu, and then copy my data (all stored in ~/repos) to an external disk. Once this was done (and I had double checked all the data was there), I reinstalled Linux on the disk, and now keep the data in the separate disk.

To find the disk name:

```sh
sudo fdisk -l
```

To mount the disk:

```sh
sudo mkdir -p /mnt/data
sudo mount /dev/sdb /mnt/data/
```

To create a symlink to be able to access the mounted disk in the same location:

```sh
sudo ln -s /mnt/data ~/repos
```

I also have another disk that I can attach to my host machine, and then to my virtual machine in order to move files from one to the other. Annoyingly, they can't both be attached, but it works if you need to do an offline transfer. I wonder if you could do something easier using the network between the host and virtual machine.

# Networking

In order to connect to a customer's VCS, I needed to use a proprietary VPN connection, which their IT team had setup on my host machine. In order to use this connection from my virtual machine, I had to do some network configuration.

1. In HyperV, create a new External Virtual Switch, and select the VPN connection.
2. Connect this new Virtual Switch to your VM.
3. You should now be connected to the VPN.

In doing this, I somehow disabled my Default Switch, so I had to reconfigure the VM to use a new Internal Virtual Switch.

1. Create a new Internal Virtual Switch.
2. From within the VM,